Ronnie James
	
--------------

Hello Ash and the gang,

 

You and the rest of the team at The MagPi are doing an excellent job at providing an abundance of material in various forms to us information hungry Raspberry Pi users throughout the globe.  The quality and quantity of articles in each issue is going from strength to strength.  For all the work that goes into putting each issue together, I offer up my extremely grateful thank you.

 

I’m a relative new comer to the magazine (and the Raspberry Pi in general).  It was last November, when browsing through Kickstarter, that I came across the Kano kit and my interest were aroused.  I had vaguely heard of the Raspberry Pi at that point but, to be honest, hadn’t given it too much thought until then.  It was at that time that I began to pay a little more attention to it all!  The more I explored, the more I liked what I discovered.  I couldn’t see myself waiting until the middle of 2014 (when the Kano kit is due for dispatch to backers of the project), so I was treated to a nice Pi setup at the tail-end of last year.

 

To put you in the picture a little more, I’m of the age that remembers (and used) the Sinclair ZX80, ZX81, ZX Spectrum and so forth…..Ah, those were the days!  So you can understand that the more I investigated the Raspberry Pi, the more I realised the potential of this ‘little beastie’.  The old fever from the early eighties was back and I was leaping around like a kid at Christmas – jumping around here, there and everywhere.  There’s so many roads to go down, but I’ve settled down a bit now and I’m currently learning the ins and outs of Python and Linux programming.  I’m knitting this in with a brand-new topic as far as I’m concerned, namely electronics.  Oh!.....little flashing LEDs and so forth…..how pretty.  I’m afraid to say that the greatest majority of the blame for this obsession lies squarely at your door.  I was living life in blissful ignorance until I came across your magazine;-)

 

As I mentioned at the start, The MagPi offers a boatload of material to muck around with and I take my hat off to the team for making this possible to the community at large.  Your time and effort is greatly appreciated.  You all deserve a big round of applause (clap, clap, clap, clap, clap……)  I  foresee 2014 as ‘the year of The MagPi’.

 

In true Scottish spirit…..Cheers the noo - and have a wee dram on me.
